# Topo2STL

Converts MNT topographical data (like those provided by IGN RGEALTI/BDALTI services) into greyscale heightmaps for use in 3D modeling software. The output images are greyscale PNGs with a resolution of 16 bit per channel which allow for a precision that will probably exceed the precision of your input data (0.13 m resolution).

Can take arbitrarily (im)precise maps and downscale as needed to fit any area/processing capabilities.

## Usage

```text
MNT2Heightmap [-h] [-o OUTPUT] [-d DOWNSCALE_FACTOR] [-m {sqrt,log2,log10,sqre,raw}] [-t] input_path

input_path
    Directory or file to process
    If the path is a directory, all ".mnt" files contained within will be processed.

-h, --help
    show this help message and exit

-o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
    Output path for the final image
    Output file name will be autogenerated if a directory is provided.

-d DOWNSCALE_FACTOR, --downscale-factor DOWNSCALE_FACTOR
    Downscale factor
    By how much the image will be shrunk in the X/Y axis relative to the source data

  -m {sqrt,log2,log10,sqre,raw}, --modifier {sqrt,log2,log10,sqre,raw}
    Modifier that will be applied to altitude values.

  -t, --transparent
    Enable transparency on missing data. Warning: will double output image size.
```

## Output images information

### Format

Output images are greyscale with a single 16-bit channel (L;16 mode) + optional alpha channel (LA;16 mode) when -t is specified.
Pixel brightness is proportional to the altitude after modifiers are applied (see below), with 0x0 being sea level and 0xffff being 4500 meters.
If source data is missing, the resulting color is 0x0. If the alpha channel is enabled with -t, the resulting pixel will additionally be transparent.

### Modifiers

A modifier can be applied to the altitude to alter the altitude/brightness mapping using the -m parameter: for example `-m sqrt` will make it so that the pixel brightness will be proportional to the square root of the altitude. By default, brightness is linerarly proportional to altitude.

### Output image size

Image size is source data size divided by downscale factor (-d parameter). Ex: If the downscale factor is 2, 1 pixel represents a 2*2 "square" of source data.

## Developer's notes

Altitude data is lazyloaded: when an ASCFile object is instanced, only metadata is loaded and the full file is only read at the first call to ASCFile.data, ASCFile.minAltitude or ASCFile.maxAltitude.

For some ungodly reason the IGN MNT files are "west-up": the "top line" of the file represents the "leftmost" column of a traditional map. Note the rot90 call before incorporating the map data to the assembled image data.

Remember to call `ASCFile.free_data()` when working with big areas at small resolutions to avoid excessive RAM usage.

Primer on how to apply the heightmap to a mesh in blender: https://youtu.be/7-cGwA65hRA?si=4fc--g_BbEew7ysP&t=86
